---
title: Identifying HTTP Exchanges with URIs
abbrev: HTTP Exchange URIs
docname: draft-thomson-http-hx-uri-latest
category: exp

ipr: trust200902
area: ART
workgroup: HTTPbis
keyword: Internet-Draft

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs]

author:
 -
    name: Martin Thomson
    organization: Mozilla
    email: mt@lowentropy.net


--- abstract

URI schemes are defined that enable identification of HTTP exchanges, or parts
of those exchanges.


--- middle

# Introduction

It is common for applications that use HTTP {{!HTTP=I-D.ietf-httpbis-semantics}}
to use a "follow your nose" design.  In this design, clients make requests to
discover or create resources and to learn information about resources they are
interested in.  Once the identity of resources is learned, clients then interact
with those resources.  This process is often iterative, with clients following
multiple links to reach resources of interest.

A negative consequence of these designs is that the discovery or creation steps
add latency to any operation that depends on the identity of resources.

For applications that use well-defined formats, though the result of a request
might be unknown, an application might have reliable knowledge about the form of
the response.  If components of that answer could be incorporated into another
request by reference, then the application might save a round trip for every
such occurrence.

The `hx` URI scheme identifies components of HTTP exchanges.  The `hxr` URI
scheme provides for further indirection, allowing the dereferencing of URLs in
identified HTTP exchanges.


## Example

In this simple example, a client wishes to create and then update a resource.

~~~
POST /make-object?name=example HTTP/1.1
Host: example.com

~~~

The server creates a resource and provides its location in a response:

~~~
HTTP/1.1 201 Created
Location: https://example.com/roZ2ITW
Content-Type: example/example+json

{
  "uri": "https://example.com/roZ2ITW",
  "name": "example",
  "items": { "a": 1, "b": 2 }
}
~~~

After receiving the identity of the resource, the client can then interact with
that resource, here copying the value of "b" to a new key called "c":

~~~
POST /roZ2ITW HTTP/1.1
Host: example.com

add_item: c=2
~~~

With an `hx` URI, and support from the server, the client can send the second
request at the same time as the first, relying on the server to dereference the
`hxr` URI:

~~~
POST hxr:///0/a/h/location?201 HTTP/1.1
Host: example.com

add_item: c=@hx:///0/a/b?ct=example%2fexample+json#/items/b
~~~

If the server understands the `hxr` URI scheme, it dereferences that URI to
determine the target of the request.  The value from /items/b (using JSON
Pointer {{?RFC6901}}) is copied using the `hx` URI scheme.

Note that it can be seen that though the initial POST request that creates the
resource is not idempotent, the client is able to construct the next request in
a way that ensures that they are conditional on the outcome of that request.
This ensures that the transaction does not complete unless all requests are
successful.


## Conventions and Definitions

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14 {{!RFC2119}} {{!RFC8174}}
when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.


## Terminology

This document uses terminology from HTTP {{!HTTP}}.  The phrase HTTP URI is used
to refer to http:// and https:// URIs collectively.  However, this document is only
capable of identifying requests that are sent over secured transports.


# Overview

An `hx` URI identifies an HTTP exchange, or parts of that exchange.  The primary
advantage of this in referring to the product of a request before it is
completed.

A scheme of "hx" is followed by an authority that identifies the connection on
which the exchange was initiated.  A minimal path includes an identifier for the
exchange, as a decimal number.  For instance, assuming that the authority
`b5dd5901aef3f33de572` refers to an HTTP/2 connection, the following URI
identifies entire exchange on stream 7 of that connection (see {{exchange}}).

~~~
hx://b5dd5901aef3f33de572/7
~~~

Adding additional path elements narrows this to refer to the request (see
{{target}}):

~~~
hx://b5dd5901aef3f33de572/7/q
~~~

Further path elements allow components of a message to be identified, such as a
Location header field value (see {{component-header-field}}):

~~~
hx://b5dd5901aef3f33de572/7/a/h/location
~~~

To ensure that the Location header field is only used if the request resulted in
the creation of a new resource (that is, the response had a 201 (Created) status
code), conditions can be added to the URI as query parameters:

~~~
hx://b5dd5901aef3f33de572/7/a/h/location?201
~~~

A fragment can be used if the content has an associated content type that
supports fragment identifiers, which is generally only possible for the body of
a request or response:

~~~
hx://b5dd5901aef3f33de572/7/a/b#title
~~~

How a fragment is used depends on the content type of the identified resource,
so a condition might be added to specify the content type of the target
resource:

~~~
hx://b5dd5901aef3f33de572/7/a/b?ct=text%2Fhtml#title
~~~

The `hxr` URI scheme is identical to `hx` except that it is dereferenced twice.
A reference that uses the `hxr` scheme can therefore be used where a URI would
otherwise be used, taking the value of the URI from chosen part of the
identified exchange.


# Authority

The authority component of an `hx` or `hxr` URI is an identifier for a
connection.

The process for generating a unique identifier uses TLS exporters (see Section
7.5 of {{!TLS13=RFC8446}}).  Consequently, exchanges on connections that do not
use TLS cannot be identified using `hx` or `hxr` URIs.

A TLS exporter with the label "EXPORTER-hx-authority" and an empty context is
used to produce a 10 octet value.  This value is then encoded in hexadecimal
(that is, Base 16 {{!RFC4648}}) to produce a 20 character authority.

The authority can be omitted where the identity of the connection can be
inferred from context.  For instance, where the URI is sent over the same
connection.  The current connection is used if an authority is absent.

~~~
hx:///7
~~~

The userinfo and port components of an `hx` or `hxr` URI MUST NOT be used.  Any
URI with userinfo or port components is invalid.


# Identifying an Exchange {#exchange}

After identifying the connection, the first element of the path after the
initial slash ("/") identifies a request-response exchange.

A decimal value is used to identify an exchange.  How requests are identified
depends on the version of HTTP in use.

A single "p" character followed by a decimal value is used to identify a server
push, see {{exchange-push}}.

An `hx` or `hxr` URI always includes fields that identify an exchange.  For
instance, the following URIs are incomplete and therefore invalid:

~~~
hx://
hx:///
hx://b5dd5901aef3f33de572/
~~~


## Identifying HTTP/1.1 Exchanges {#exchange11}

In HTTP/1.1 {{!HTTP11=I-D.ietf-httpbis-messaging}} and earlier, the numeric
identifier for an exchange counts the number of exchanges on the connection that
precede the target exchange.  The first exchange on a connection is therefore
identified as `hx:///0`.  Subsequent requests increment this value by 1.


## Identifying HTTP/2 Exchanges {#exchange2}

In HTTP/2 {{!HTTP2=RFC7540}}, the numeric identifier for an exchange corresponds
to a HTTP/2 stream identifier.  The first exchange on a connection is therefore
identified as `hx:///1`.  As a result, all exchanges that are not server pushes
use odd-numbered identifiers.


## Identifiers HTTP/3 Exchanges {#exchange3}

In HTTP/3 {{!HTTP3=I-D.ietf-quic-http}}, the numeric identifier for an exchange
corresponds to a QUIC stream identifier.  The first exchange on a connection is
therefore identified as `hx:///0`.  Consequently, all exchanges that are not
server pushes use identifiers that are whole multiples of 4.


## Identifying Server Pushes {#exchange-push}

A server push exchange is identified by a "p" prefix followed by a decimal
value.  For example:

~~~
hx:///p6
~~~

In HTTP/2, a stream identifier is sufficient to distinguish between requests and
server pushes.  Thus, identifying a server push is possible even if the "p"
prefix is omitted.  In HTTP/2, all server pushes use even-numbered identifiers.

Server pushes in HTTP/3 are given a push ID, an identifier that might be the
same as the stream ID used for requests.  The push ID is used to identify server
push in HTTP/3.  Thus, in HTTP/3, the "p" prefix is necessary to properly
identify a server push.

HTTP versions prior to HTTP/2 do not provide server push, so an `hx` URI that
attempts to identify a server push cannot be successfully resolved.


# Targets {#target}

Without further qualification, an `hx` URI identifies a message exchange, both
the request and the response as a whole.  Applications can narrow this to a
request ({{target-request}}) or response ({{target-response}}).

A `hxr` URI always identifies a request or response, it cannot identify a
complete exchange.


## Identifying a Request {#target-request}

A request is identified by adding "/q" to a URI identifying an exchange.  For
example:

~~~
hx://546c9bce274b06cf859d/84/q
~~~

## Identifying a Response {#target-response}

A response is identified by adding "/a" to a URI identifying an exchange.  For
example:

~~~
hx://18660225619af2c6c300/173/a
~~~


## Redirections

An `hx` or `hxr` URI applies to a single exchange over a single connection.  If
a 3xx status code results in a client following a redirect, that exchange is
identified separately.


# Identifying Request or Response Components {#component}

After identifying a single message, additional path components can be used to
identify parts of the message.

TBD:

: It might make sense to put "/m", "/u", "/s", and "/i" as peers to "/q" and
  "/a" rather than attaching them underneath.  The primary advantage would be a
  shorter identifier.  (Doing this for "/i" alone might work, as that is more of
  a peer to "/a".)


## Identifying the Request Method {#component-method}

A path component of "/m" indicates that an 'hx' URI identifies the request
method.  This component is not valid for an `hxr` URI or an `hx` URI that
identifies a response.


## Identifying the Effective Request URI {#component-uri}

A path component of "/u" indicates that an 'hx' or `hxr` URI identifies the
effective request URI (see Section 5.3 of {{!HTTP}}).


## Identifying the Response Status {#component-status}

A path component of "/s" indicates that an 'hx' URI identifies the response
status.  This component is not valid for an `hxr` URI or an `hx` URI for a
request.


## Identifying the Message Body {#component-body}

A path component of "/b" identifies the body of the message.  A body can be
identified for both `hx` and `hxr` URIs.

Identifying the body of a message without a body (like a GET request or a 204
(No Content) response) successfully identifies the empty body.


## Informational (1xx) Responses {#component-informational}

The "/i" path component can be used to select informational responses.

The "/i" component is followed by a path component that identifies which
informational responses to select.  If this contains a decimal value, this
indicates the number of the informational response to select.  The first
information response is identified with "0", with subsequent information
responses each using a number 1 greater than the last.  A value of "@" is used
to identify the last informational response and a value of "*" identifies all
informational responses.

TBD:

: Indexing is a little strange given the use case here.  The problem lies in
  working out what to do with multiple entries.  Maybe the right answer is to
  allow for selecting just the first, last, or all items.  That would simplify
  the scheme a little.

Indexing applies after any conditions are applied (see {{condition}}), allowing
a URI to identify single informational response.

For example, the following `hx` URIs refer to the third 103 response, the last
informational response containing a Link header field, and all informational
responses respectively.

~~~
hx:///71/a/i/2?103
hx:///71/a/i/@?h=link
hx:///71/a/i/*
~~~

The path components "/s" ({{component-status}}) or "/h" ({{component-header}})
can be used to select parts of an informational response.  For example, all Link
header fields from informational responses can be collected with:

~~~
hx:///10/a/i/*/h/link/*
~~~


## Identifying a Message Header {#component-header}

A path component of "/h" identifies the header of a message as a whole.  When
preceded by "/i", this identifies the header of the informational response (see
{{component-informational}}).  When not preceded by "/i" it refers to the header
from requests and final responses.

Without additional path elements, this form is only valid for an `hx` URI; an
`hxr` URI requires that specific header fields be identified.


## Identifying a Message Trailer {#component-trailer}

A path component of "/t" specifically identifies the trailer of a message.
Trailers are subject to the same restrictions as headers with the additional
condition that they can't be present on informational responses.


## Identifying Header Field Values {#component-header-field}

Adding a path component containing the name of a header field to a path that
identifies the a header ("/h" or "/i/.../h") or trailer ("/t") from a message
selects that header field only.

The next path component indexes header field values, just like informational
responses are indexed (see {{component-informational}}).  All values from the
message are identified by "*".  A decimal value indicates a 0-based index into
values.  The last value is identified by "@".

Values that use the HTTP list construction are not indexed by instances of the
header field, but by the comma-separated values that are present.  Empty values
or those containing only whitespace are skipped and cannot be indexed.

To illustrate this, there are 4 values that can be indexed in the following
HTTP/1.1 example. The third value is "3" and the last ("/@") is "4".

~~~
Example: 1
Example: 2, ,3
Example: ,4,
~~~

As a special case, an `hxr` URI that refers to the value of a Link header field
{{!LINK=RFC8288}} can be used as a reference.


# Conditions {#condition}

The query string of an `hx` URI carries a set of conditions.  Unless any
conditions evaluate to true, the resolution of the URI will fail.  This allows
for specification of URIs that are conditional on details of the HTTP exchange.

For example, the following URI cannot be dereferenced unless the response
indicates success, ensuring that the body of an unwanted response like 503 is
not used:

~~~
hx://b5dd5901aef3f33de572/7/a/b?2xx
~~~

Conditions are separated by the ampersand ("&") character.  Each comprises a
label that identifies the type of the condition, and an optional value.  The
value is separated from the label by an equals sign ("=") character.

This document defines conditions for status code ({{condition-status}}), header
field values ({{condition-header}}), response content-type
({{condition-ct}}), and link relation ({{condition-rel}}).  Conditions that are
not understood always evaluate to false, causing resolution to fail.


## Condition Processing Model {#condition-processing}

Conditions are potentially processed multiple times.

Multiple values can be produced for informational responses and header fields.
In each case, when multiple values are produced, conditions are evaluated.  This
might reduce the number of options.  If multiple values remain, all options are
considered when evaluating the remainder of the URI path.

For instance, a Link header field {{?LINK}} might appear multiple times and in
multiple informational responses.  The Link Relation Type condition
({{condition-rel}}) might be used to select all link relations of a given type
across all informational responses.

~~~
hx:///29/a/i/*/h/link/*?rel=start
~~~


## Percent-Encoding of Condition Values {#condition-pct-encoding}

The URI grammar {{!URI=RFC3986}} prohibits the use of certain characters in the
query string.  This scheme uses percent-encoding to allow conditions to carry
values that are not permitted by the URI grammar.  Section 2.1 of {{!URI}}
defines percent-encoding.  The `hx-pct-encoded` rule in {{grammar-hx}} defines
the characters that don't require encoding; all other values MUST be
percent-encoded.


## Status Condition {#condition-status}

Any condition that starts with a numeral from "1" to "5" is used to specify a
condition on the response status.

If the condition contains three digits, the condition evaluates to true if the
response contained a matching status code.

A condition that contains a numeral and two "x" characters evaluates to true if
the status code is from the identified class.  For instance, the following
identifies a request that was redirected:

~~~
hx:///22/q?3xx
~~~

A condition that specifies an informational status code (1xx) will be true if an
informational response of that type was present.  It does not result in limiting
the components that can be selected.  Specific 100-series status codes can be
used to limit which informational responses are selected if the "/i" path
component is used (see {{component-informational}}).

A URI that identifies a header field will resolve the final value of the header
field unless a specific portion of the response is specified (using "/i" or
"/t"), taking into account values from final responses and trailers as defined
in {{component-header}}.

This condition can be used to identify components of a request, conditional on
the status code of the response.

New condition definitions MUST NOT start with a numeral from "1" and "5".


## Header Field Value Condition {#condition-header}

The header field condition is identified with a "h" token.  A "h=" is followed
by the name of the header field.  With no further values, this condition is
satisfied if a header field with the same name is present in the identified part
of the message.  An additional "=" character can be added, which causes the
condition to be true only when the value of the header field is equal to the
remainder of the condition.

This condition applies to any header field from the identified object.  Thus, if
the URI does not specify whether a request or response, the condition is met
based on the presence or value of the header or trailer field in request or
response, including informational responses.  If the target of the URI is a
request, response, or informational response, then only header and trailer
fields in the corresponding part of the message apply.  For instance, if the URI
identies the header, then only header fields are used to match.

Thus, to identify a request if it contains a User-Agent header field with any
value, the following might be used:

~~~
hx:///30/q?h=user-agent
~~~

To select a response body only if it indicates that requests for byte ranges are
supported, the following might be used:

~~~
hx:///71/a/b?h=accept-ranges=bytes
~~~

Alternative forms of matching aside from equality might be provided in future.


## Response Content Type Condition {#condition-ct}

The response content type condition matches if the content type of the response
matches the specified content type.  Acceptable values and rules for determining
what values match follow the rules for the Accept header field (see Section
8.4.2 of {{!HTTP}}).

The response content type condition is identified by "ct" and is followed by a
percent-encoded content type.  For example:

~~~
hx:///12/a/b?ct=text%2Fhtml
~~~

Unlike the header field condition ({{condition-header}}), the response content
type condition can be used with URIs that identify components of a request.  In
that case, it indicates that the identification is conditional on the content
type of the response (not the request).

Separator characters ("/", ";" and ",") MUST be percent-encoded in the value of
this condition.


## Link Relation Condition {#condition-rel}

A link relation condition filters results by those that contain a link relation
{{!LINK=RFC8288}} of the specified type.

The link relation condition is identified by "rel" and is followed by a link
relation type.  Link relations that include non-token characters, such as those
that use the URL form, MUST be percent-encoded.

If the target is a request, response, informational response, or component that
contains header fields, only those messages or parts of messages that contain a
link relation of the specified type are selected.

If the target is a Link header field, then only link relations of the identified
type are selected.  Deferencing fails if any other header field is identified.


# hx URI Grammar {#grammar-hx}

In ABNF {{!RFC5234}}, the `hx` URI scheme can be described as a narrow profile
of that defined in {{!URI=RFC3986}}.

~~~
hx-URI = "hx://" [ hx-authority ] hx-exchange
         [ hx-target ] [ hx-conditions ]
hx-authority = 20HEXDIG
hx-exchange = "/" [ "p" ] 1*DIGIT

hx-target = hx-request / hx-response
hx-request = "/q" [ "/" hx-component ]
hx-response = "/a" [ "/" hx-component ]

hx-component = hx-method / hx-uri / hx-info
             / hx-header / hx-body / hx-trailer
hx-method = "/m"
hx-uri = "/u"
hx-info = "/i/" hx-index [ hx-status / hx-header ]
hx-status = "/s"
hx-header = "/h" [ "/" hx-token [ "/" hx-index ] ]
hx-body = "/b"
hx-trailer = "/t" [ "/" hx-token [ "/" hx-index ] ]

hx-index = 1*DIGIT / "@" / "*"
hx-token = 1*hx-token-char
hx-token-char = "-" / "." / "_" / DIGIT / ALPHA

hx-conditions = "?" hx-condition *("&" hx-condition)
hx-condition = hx-status-cond / hx-header-cond
             / hx-ct-cond / hx-extension-cond
hx-status-cond = ("1" / "2" / "3" / "4" / "5") (2DIGIT / "xx")
hx-header-cond = "h=" hx-token [ "=" hx-pct-encoded ]
hx-ct-cond = "ct=" hx-pct-encoded
hx-extension-cond = hx-token [ "=" hx-pct-encoded ]

hx-pct-encoded = *( hx-token-char / ("%" 2HEXDIG) )
~~~

<!--
hx-token could use the token rule from HTTP, but that would make this grammar
far worse, just to cater to those idiots who think that backticks in a header
field name is a good idea.
-->


# hxr URI Grammar {#grammar-hxr}

The `hxr` URI scheme uses the same basic grammar as the `hx` URI scheme.
However, since this can only ever reference parts of an exchange that could
contain a URI, the grammar is more narrowly defined.

~~~
hxr-URI = "hxr://" [ hx-authority ] "/" hx-exchange
         hxr-target [ "?" hx-conditions ]

hxr-targets = hxr-request / hxr-response
hxr-request = "/q/" hxr-component
hxr-response = "/a/" hxr-component

hxr-component = hx-uri / hxr-info
              / hxr-header / hx-body / hxr-trailer
hxr-info = "/i/" hx-index hxr-header
hxr-header = "/h/" hx-token [ "/" hx-index ]
hxr-trailer = "/t/" hx-token [ "/" hx-index ]
~~~

The main difference between the `hx` and `hxr` schemes is that `hxr` URIs
contain a narrower set of possible values, omitting all means of identifying
parts of a request that cannot produce a URI.


# Security Considerations

Resolution of details of unfulfilled requests could present a significant state
commitment on servers.  Servers that receive requests that depend on other
requests might have to block processing until the outcome of the referenced
requests is complete.  Alternatively, servers might need to hold information
about completed requests in anticipation of receiving references to that
request.

Servers can fail resolution of `hx` or `hxr` URIs if the state required would
present an undue burden on their operation.  Servers might limit the types of
information that can be retained and referenced to reduce this cost.

Applications that use these URI schemes MUST define what types of reference a
server is expected to be able to handle, or provide a means of negotiating what
can be relied on.


# IANA Considerations

This document registers the `hx` and `hxr` URI schemes.  In support of this,
registrations are made in the TLS exporters registry ({{iana-exporter}}) and
registries are established for managing the parameters of the URI schemes
({{iana-registries}}).


## hx URI scheme Registration {#iana-hx}

The `hx` URI scheme is registered according to the procedures in
{{!BCP35=RFC7595}}.

Scheme name:
: hx

Status:
: Permanent/Provisional

Applications/protocols that use this scheme name:

: Applications use URIs with this scheme to identify HTTP exchanges, requests,
  responses, or components of those messages.

Contact:
: IETF Chair <chair@ietf.org>

Change controller:
: IESG <iesg@ietf.org>

Reference:
: This document.


## hxr URI scheme Registration {#iana-hxr}

The `hxr` URI scheme is registered according to the procedures in
{{!BCP35=RFC7595}}.

Scheme name:
: hxr

Status:
: Permanent/Provisional

Applications/protocols that use this scheme name:

: Applications use URIs with this scheme in place of URIs where the intended URI
  is found in a component of an HTTP exchange.

Contact:
: IETF Chair <chair@ietf.org>

Change controller:
: IESG <iesg@ietf.org>

Reference:
: This document.


## TLS Exporter Registration {#iana-exporter}

TODO


## hx and hxr URI Scheme Registries {#iana-registries}

TODO considering setting up registries for various bits of the syntax.


--- back

# Acknowledgments
{:numbered="false"}

TODO acknowledge.
